# Project/Application 1: Analysis of Citation Graphs
## Project (proj_1.py)
The Module 1 project file contains Python code that creates dictionaries corresponding to some simple examples of graphs, as well as two short functions that compute information about the distribution of the in-degrees for nodes in these graphs. These functions are utilized in the Application component of Module 1, where they are used to analyze the degree distribution of a citation graph for a collection of physics papers.
## Application (app_1.py)
The Module 1 application file combines mathematical analysis with the code from the project file to analyze the real-world problem of how scientific papers get cited. This application analyzes the structure of graphs generated by citation patterns from scientific papers to determine if cited papers are chosen randomly (from within the domain of the paper) or if there is some hidden pattern. It contrasts the in-degree distribution of a specific graph with those of graphs generated by two different random processes.

### Question 1:
Compute the in-degree distribution for the citation graph, normalize it, and then create a log/log plot of the points in this normalized distribution.

### Question 2:
Algorithm ER generates random undirected graphs. The following simple modification of the algorithm can be made to generate random directed graphs: for every ordered pair of distinct nodes (*i*,*j*), the modified algorithm adds the directed edge from *i* to *j* with probability *p*.

Consider the shape of the in-degree distribution for an ER graph and compare its shape to that of the physics citation graph:
* **Is the expected value of the in-degree the same for every node in an ER graph?** 
  (Please answer yes or no and include a short explanation for your answer.)
* **What does the in-degree distribution for an ER graph look like?** 
  (Provide a short written description of the shape of the distribution.)
* **Does the shape of the in-degree distribution plot for ER look similar to the shape of the in-degree distribution for the citation graph?** 
  (Provide a short explanation of the similarities or differences. Focus on comparing the shape of the two plots as discussed in the class page on "Creating, formatting, and     comparing plots".)
